---
title: Packages and environments
---

::: questions
- How do I work with environments?
- What are these `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml` files?
- How do I install more dependencies?
:::

::: objectives
- pkg> status
- pkg> add (in more details)
- pkg> remove 
- Project.toml
- Manifest.toml
- pkg> instantiate
- pkg> activate
- pkg> activate --temp
- pkg> activate @place
:::


In general software development, it often makes sense to make use of existing packages rather than implementing everything yourself. The Julia world is no different, and provides a standard way to manage this, via the `Pkg` system.

In the following, we will explore using the Julia REPL to set up a project and manage adding dependencies.

## Make a new project

We will first make a directory and move to it:
```shell
mkdir Dummy
cd Dummy
```

We open the Julia REPL and enter `pkg` mode by pressing `]`:

```shell
julia
julia> # press ]
pkg>
```
In this mode, we can run a variety of commands for managing our project's dependencies.

First we will use `pkg> status` to check what the current situation is, according to Julia:
```shell
pkg> status
```

The output gives us details about the current environment we are using. There will be a list of any dependencies that have been installed, and their versions.

The first line of output may look something like this:
```output
Status `~/.julia/environments/v1.11/Project.toml`
```

This shows the path to the current environment definition, which is in a file called `Project.toml` (we will discuss this later). From the path we see that this is the default environment for our version of Julia (in the above case, `v1.11`). This is the environment that will be used unless the user specifies a different one.

In practice, we generally make specific environments for specific projects. This avoids issues of multiple/clashing versions of dependencies, removes unused dependencies (keeping the project environment clean) and allows you to easily publish your project as a package, if desired.

Therefore, let us indicate to Julia that we wish to use an environment for our `Dummy` project. We do this using the `pkg> activate` command:

```shell
pkg> activate .
```
Note that the `.` is important here, as we are supplying a path as an argument to `activate`. This tells Julia that we want to use the current (`./`) directory as a location for a project.
Julia will confirm that you are activating a new project at your current location (the `Dummy/` directory).

As before, we can use `pkg> status` at any time to check what environment we are in:

```shell
pkg> status
```

This will now output "Status" followed by a path to the `Dummy/` directory. This indicates that we have successfully begun working in an environment based there.

The output also indicates that this is an `(empty project)`. This is because we have not added any dependencies yet.


## Adding dependencies to your project

If we wish to use functionality of another package in our code, we can add it as a dependency of our project. For example, let us say we wish to add Julia's `Random` package as a dependency. We can do this using `pkg> add`:

```shell
pkg> add Random
```

Julia will now download a version of this package and pre-compile it.

```shell
pkg> status
```

Running `pkg> status` now will list 'Random' as a dependency, instead of showing "(empty project)" as it did before.

You may notice that a line in the output also indicates that a `Project.toml` file has been updated.


## `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml`

Looking in the previously empty `Dummy/` directory, you should now see the appearance of two files: `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml`.

From the terminal, you can open these in your currently running vscode window using `code -r`:
```shell
code -r Project.toml
```

```output
[deps]
Random = "9a3f8284-a2c9-5f02-9a11-845980a1fd5c"
```

Inspecting `Project.toml`, we see that it has a `[deps]` section, which stands for "dependencies". There is a single dependency, `Random`, along with a long string of letters and numbers. This is the Universally Unique Identifier (UUID) of the package. This will be covered in a later episode.

Next, we inspect `Manifest.toml`.

```shell
code -r Manifest.toml
```

```output
# This file is machine-generated - editing it directly is not advised

julia_version = "1.11.3"
manifest_format = "2.0"
project_hash = "fa3e19418881bf344f5796e1504923a7c80ab1ed"

[[deps.Random]]
deps = ["SHA"]
uuid = "9a3f8284-a2c9-5f02-9a11-845980a1fd5c"
version = "1.11.0"

[[deps.SHA]]
uuid = "ea8e919c-243c-51af-8825-aaa63cd721ce"
version = "0.7.0"
```

Initially, we see that it contains some information that is similar to the contents of `Project.toml`. We see the `Random` package we added earlier, and its UUID, but
now also a specific version for that package. We also a dependency of the `Random` package itself.

So both `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml` appear to specify the dependencies of the project. Generally speaking, dependencies may have many versions which may be acceptable (compatible). `Project.toml` gives the requirements of the project on a comparatively high-level, whereas `Manifest.toml` specifies exact versions for each dependency, as well as a hash of the entire project. Therefore, `Manifest.toml` specifies a particular working installation of the package. For most projects, many `Manifest.toml` configurations could be possible.

Note: As the comment at the top of `Manifest.toml` states, the file is automatically generated and should generally not be edited directly.


### Removing dependencies

If a dependency was added by mistake, or if we no longer need it, we may wish to remove it. In our case, we only added the `Random` package as an example - we have no plans to use it. So let's remove it as a dependency.

```shell
pkg> remove Random
```

If we check `pkg> status` again, we see that we have returned to the "(empty project)" state. Similarly, looking inside `Project.toml` we see that the dependency has indeed disappeared from the project.

```shell
pkg> status
```

:::challenge
#### Add and remove the Dates package (3 min)

There is a `Dates` standard Julia package. Try adding this as a dependency, then check `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml` to see what has changed.

Then remove the `Dates` dependency when you are done.

::::solution
```shell
pkg> add Dates
pkg> status
pkg> code -r Project.toml Manifest.toml
pkg> remove Dates
```
::::
:::




### Activating the default environment again

Sometimes you may wish to return to using the default environment for your Julia version.

If your version is e.g. `1.11` then the command would look like:
```shell
pkg> activate @v1.11
```

:::callout
Note the `@` symbol before the environment name. This tells us that it is a "shared" environment. That means it can be loaded by name (i.e. without specifying the path to the `Project.toml` file explicitly. You can make your own shared environments for various reasons but that is beyond the scope of the present lesson.
:::

You can also simply type `activate` with no arguments and Julia will also return to the default environment.


### Temporary environments

In some cases, you may wish to work with a "throwaway" environment - one in which you can add dependencies without it affecting your current project.

You can do this using `pkg> activate --temp`:

```shell
pkg> activate --temp
```

This will output something like `Activating new project at /tmp/jl_4xvh88`.

You can now work with this as with any other environment, but without the fear that changes you make are messing up the `Project.toml` of the project you are working on.

As an example, let's add the `Random` package again.
```shell
pkg> status
pkg> add Random
pkg> status
```

We see that `Random` is installed in our temporary environment.

We can now exit the Julia REPL and open our `Project.toml` file as before:
```shell
code -r Project.toml
```

We see that this is empty (no dependencies), confirming that the project has not been affected by changes made to the temp environment.



### Using another project

Simply activating a project does not actually make Julia download and install any dependencies that may be listed in `Project.toml` (and `Manifest.toml`) but are missing on your machine.

You may have this sitation if someone you are developing with has added a new dependency to the package, or shared their `Manifest.toml` with you.

In such a case, you can make Julia fetch and install any dependencies you need using the `pkg> instantiate` command, to install exactly the packages specified in the `Manifest.toml`.

```shell
pkg> instantiate
```

`pkg> instantiate` will not do anything if you already have everything you need, so it is safe to use.


::: keypoints
- Julia has a built-in package manager called `Pkg`.
- The package manager is usually accessed from the REPL, by pressing `]`.
- `Project.toml` lists the dependencies of a package.
- `Manifest.toml` specifies a completely reproducible environment with exact versions.
:::
